Rainer Simon (2008) Mobilizing the Geospatial Web: A Framework 
and Conceptual Model for Spatially Aware Mobile Web Applications,
Doctoral Thesis,  Vienna University of Technology,
Vienna, Austria.

ABSTRACT

Over the last years, Web mapping services like Google Maps, 
Yahoo Maps or Microsoft Live Maps, as well as three-dimensional
virtual globes like Google Earth or NASA World Wind have sparked
an unprecedented public interest in geospatial information.
The early availability of free content authoring toolkits and
open programming interfaces to these applications has spawned 
an avid community of Web mapping enthusiasts: from casual users
who produce and share different types of geospatial content as
varied as geo-referenced photographs or GPS recordings of cycling
routes, to technology-savvy hobbyist developers who create
elaborate "map mashups" – interactive map applications that
combine existing geospatial data and bring them to new use for 
a variety of purposes from education, to planning of day-to-day
activities, to entertainment.

With the increased use of the Web from mobile devices, the
combination of user generated geospatial content and mobile
interaction towards user-generated mobile geospatial applications
can be viewed as a next logical step. Yet, while sophisticated 
tools have made the development and distribution of geospatial Web
applications for the large screen almost effortless, the development
of mobile applications in general – and of mobile geospatial
applications and location based services in particular – remains the
domain of a few trained specialists.

This thesis is concerned with the integration of geospatial data
in mobile Web applications. The goal of this work is to identify
the technical requirements and architectural components necessary
to bridge the gap between existing end user Web mapping tools, and
the current complexity of mobile application development: an approach
is proposed that simplifies the creation of location aware geospatial
applications, thus allowing end users and hobbyist developers to
experiment with this new form of mobile interaction. The thesis thereby
builds on existing standards and methods throughout. The established
Web application architecture is extended with software components that
allow existing geospatial Web content to be re-used as a mobile, location
aware application, without additional effort or the need for
modifications.

The verification of the system is achieved through several experiments
and tests. It is illustrated how the new architecture can be applied to
a wide range of mobile devices with varying characteristics and capabilities,
and how external influences such as GPS error affect the system’s operation.
In particular, the verification takes into account recent trends on the
mobile handset market: novel ways of spatial interaction and user interfaces
made possible by orientation aware mobile phones which feature integrated
GPS, compass and tilt sensors are discussed, and exemplified in a separate
experiment.

